// ppgen source for The Story of Chanukah
// ppgen ver 3.57e

// Set title
.dt The Story of Chanukah | Project Gutenberg

// Set line length
.ll 72

// Define CSS
.de .tnbox { border:1px solid silver; padding: 0.5em; margin:2em 10% 0 10%; }

// Define macros
.dm chapter-break
.sp 4
.dm-

.dm section-break
.sp 2
.dm-

.dm new-page $1
.bn $1.png
.pn +1
.dm-

.dm new-page-break $1
.pb
.pm new-page $1
.dm-

.dm verse-start
.in +4
.nf b
.dm-

.dm verse-end
.nf-
.in -4
.dm-

// Page numbering
.pn off // turn off visible page numbers
.pn link

// Paragraph formatting, indent paragraphs by 0.75 em.
.pi
.nr psi 0.75em

.bn 001.png
.pn 1

.pm chapter-break

.ce 11
TO

THE MEMORY

OF

THE LATE MINA LIPPMAN AARON

THESE PAGES ARE

DEDICATED

.pm chapter-break

.if h
.il fn=i001.png w=45px ew=10%

.pm chapter-break
.if-

.pm new-page 002
.pm new-page-break 003

.pm chapter-break

.h1
<fs=150%>THE|STORY OF CHANUKAH</fs>

.ce 3
BY

BENJAMIN SACKS B. A.

.il fn=i003.png w=160px ew=35%

.ce 3
HEBREW INSTITUTE

PITTSBURGH PA.

.hr 6%

.ce
5678

.hr 6%

.ce
COPYRIGHT 1913

.pm chapter-break

.pm new-page-break 004

.pm chapter-break

.fs 125%
.ce
THE FESTIVAL

The festival of Chanukah was instituted by
Judas Maccabeus and the elders of the Congregation
of Israel in the year 3595 on the
25th day of Kislev
.fs

.pm chapter-break

.pm new-page-break 005

.pm chapter-break

.il fn=i005.jpg w=400px ew=85%

.h2
<fs=125%>THE STORY OF CHANUKA.</fs>

.pm section-break

Upon the death of Alexander the Great, under
whose reign the Jews enjoyed freedom and peace,
his kingdom was divided among his generals, one
of whom took Egypt and another, Syria. There
was continual strife between the kings of these
two countries, for each wanted to subject the
other to his rule. Palestine, being situated between
Syria and Egypt, became the battlefield
upon which their armies fought. At times, the
kings of Syria would be victorious, and at times
the kings of Egypt would gain the upper hand.
For a long time the armies of Egypt were victors,
and so it happened that many of the Jews went
to live in Alexandria, where they acquired many
of the Greek customs practiced there. Judea, in
the meantime, became a tributary to Egypt. The
Jews were treated well by the Egyptians; they
were allowed to appoint their own governors; and
their religion was not interfered with.
.pm new-page 006

About 100 years after the death of Alexander,
Antiochus III., surnamed the Great, ascended the
throne of Syria. He conquered Egypt and with
it Palestine. The position of the Jews, however,
was not changed; they were mildly ruled, and
their government was left in their own hands.
Antiochus was succeeded by his oldest son, Seleucus
Philopater.

In the tenth year of the reign of Seleucus,
something happened in Judea that caused him
to turn his attention to the treasures deposited
in the Temple at Jerusalem. A violent quarrel
broke out between Onias III., who was at that
time the High Priest in Judea, and Simon, who
had been appointed governor of Jerusalem. In
order to injure Onias, Simon told the King that
there were great riches in the Temple. Seleucus
received this news with joy, for he was at this
time hard pressed for money to pay his annual
tribute to the Romans. He sent out his treasurer,
Heliodorus, to plunder the Temple, and bring
back these riches to Antioch.

.pm section-break

.h3
HELIODORUS IN THE TEMPLE.

Heliodorus immediately set out for Jerusalem,
without acquainting any one of his purpose.
When he arrived there, he told Onias of the
King’s orders, and demanded that he quietly surrender
.pm new-page 007
the treasure. The High Priest replied that
there was quite a large treasure in the Temple,
but that it was by no means as large as had been
reported; that the greater part of it consisted of
holy gifts consecrated to God; that a considerable
amount was deposited by Hyrcanus, a man high
in favor of the King; and that the remainder
was deposited by widows and orphans for safekeeping.
He added that he could not consent to
deprive the rightful owners of their property, and
thus profane his high office, which was holy and
revered by all.

The commands of the King were strict and
Heliodorus remained firm in his purpose. Attended
by a large number of armed men, he
marched to the Temple; and when the priests
tried to oppose his progress, he ordered that the
outer gates be destroyed. A great mourning
arose in the whole city, and from all sides were
heard the cries of the people. But as soon as Heliodorus
attempted to enter the Temple, a wonderful
thing happened. Legend has it that a
horse, mounted by a terrible rider, rushed toward
him, and struck him with its fore-foot. Two
beautiful youths, who attended the warrior, then
beat Heliodorus with rods until he fainted. When
Heliodorus was carried out of the Temple by the
priests, the spark of life scarcely burned within
.pm new-page 008
him. When Onias, the High Priest, saw this,
fearing lest the wrath of the King should be incurred,
offered sacrifices and prayers to God,
and thus restored Heliodorus to life. The treasurer
returned to Antioch empty-handed, and told
the King of his failure.

.pm section-break

.h3
ANTIOCHUS CROWNED KING OF SYRIA.

In the course of the same year, Heliodorus,
in hopes of succeeding to the throne, poisoned
Seleucus, the King. When Antiochus, the King’s
brother, who was returning from Rome, heard
of this, he immediately secured the aid of another
king, and easily crushed the usurper. Antiochus
IV. now became King of Syria.

.pm section-break

.h3
BUYING THE HIGH PRIESTHOOD.

Scarcely had Antiochus begun to rule, when
from all parts of his empire came the leading
men to pay homage to him. Among them came
a younger brother of the High Priest Onias, Joshua,
who called himself by the Greek name
Jason. This Jason was possessed of good manners
and polished address. At the court of Antiochus,
he was welcomed; and, by offering the
King a very large bribe, prevailed upon him to
depose his brother Onias, and appoint him in his
place. Not only was Onias removed from the
.pm new-page 009
High Priesthood, but he was also forced to take
up his residence at Antioch, where he would not
interfere with the new High Priest. Jason next
attempted to gradually make Greeks of the Jews.
Accordingly, he built a place in Jerusalem for
such sports and exercises as were practiced by
the Greeks, and established a school in which
Jewish youths could be brought up after the manner
of the Greeks.

Jason remained High Priest for only three
years. Menelaus, an ambitious and dishonest
young man, having been sent to Antioch by
Jason with tribute, by offering to pay annually
a sum amounting to $300,000 more than Jason,
succeeded in having himself appointed in his
place. This Menelaus was even more corrupt than
Jason, and later proved himself guilty of the
most horrible crimes.

.pm section-break

.h3
MENELAUS’ SACRILEGE.

Menelaus soon found that he was unable to
pay the large amount of money which he had
promised to Antiochus. The King, who demanded
punctuality of his subjects in their payment of
tribute, summoned him to Antioch. Fearing that
he would be punished or stripped of his office,
he sent secret directions to his brother Lysimachus,
.pm new-page 010
who was acting as High Priest during his
absence, to remove some of the holy vessels from
the Temple, and to send him the money obtained
by selling them. When Onias, the deposed High
Priest heard of this, his anger was aroused, and
he accused Menelaus of robbing the Temple. Menelaus
fearing, that he would be removed from his
office, bribed one of the King’s officers to kill
Onias. When Onias learned of the plot against
his life, he escaped; but later, when the officer
induced him to return by assurances of safety,
he was brutally murdered.

Great was the anger of the Jews when they
heard of this new outrage. The people of Jerusalem
rose up against the brother of Menelaus,
and put to route a number of his followers who
tried to defend him. Lysimachus, himself, escaped
to the treasury of the Temple, but was
pursued and killed. Menelaus, in the meantime
by bribing the King, gained his support, and
continued to remain in the office of High Priest.

.pm section-break

.h3
ANTIOCHUS’S ENTRANCE INTO|JERUSALEM.

While Antiochus was engaged in attacking
Egypt, a report was spread that he had been
killed. This news was received by the Jews with
.pm new-page 011
great joy. Jason, the deposed High Priest, knowing
that Menelaus would now be left without a
protector entered Jerusalem, defeated the soldiers
of Menelaus, and put the latter to flight.
Jason did not remain there long, however, for it
soon became known that Antiochus was alive and
that he was marching towards Jerusalem with
a large army. Antiochus, in the meantime, had
been led to believe that the entire Jewish nation
had revolted; and further angered by the fact
that the news of his death had caused such rejoicing,
quickly returned from Egypt; and entered
Jerusalem, where he killed 40,000 of the
inhabitants, and took as many captive. He then
robbed the treasury of the Temple, and removed
to Antioch all the sacred vessels, the table of
shewbread, the golden candlestick, and the altar
of incense.

.pm section-break

.h3
THE MASSACRE OF THE JEWS.

Upon his return, two years later from Egypt,
where he had been expelled, Antiochus determined
to avenge himself upon the Jews, whom
he now hated bitterly. Appolonius, one of his
chief generals, was sent to Judea with an army.
Inasmuch as that general had been sent there
before with his troops as a collector of taxes, his
coming caused no alarm. His soldiers did not
.pm new-page 012
trouble the inhabitants, who had not the slightest
suspicion of their intentions. When the Sabbath
came, the Syrians, knowing that the Jews would
not take up arms on that day even in self-defence,
fell upon them and slaughtered them mercilessly.
The Jews, obeying the laws of the Sabbath,
which forbade them to fight on that day,
meekly submitted to be butchered. Houses were
pulled down and plundered, and the walls of the
city destroyed.

.pm section-break

.h3
THE DESECRATION OF THE TEMPLE.

The King next issued a decree forbidding the
Jews to follow their religion and their customs,
and ordering them to adopt the Greek faith. The
keeping of the Sabbath and the reading of the
Law was prohibited on pain of death. Copies of
the Scriptures were written upon with the blood
of swine, torn into pieces, or burnt. Altars were
set up all over the country, and unclean animals
sacrificed on them. The Jews were forced to
profane the Sabbath and to eat the flesh of swine.
The Temple in Jerusalem was dedicated to Jupiter
Olympus, whose statue was erected on the
altar of burnt offerings, and sacrifices made to
it. In order to escape this terrible persecution,
many Jews fled from the holy city to the mountains.
The once beautiful Jerusalem, in which
.pm new-page 013
the Jewish people had for so many years enjoyed
happiness and peace, was now laid waste like a
wilderness and became an abode for strangers.

.pm section-break

.h3
ANTIOCHUS THE MADMAN.

In order to enforce his laws, the cruel king
of Syria sent officers to the various parts of his
empire. Of the two names by which Antiochus
was known—Epiphanes, the “Illustrious” and
Epimanes, the “Madman”—he was more often
called by the latter name. He frequently indulged
in wine, and while under its influence he became
a real madman. His highest ambition was to
make one people of all his subjects. In order to
accomplish this, he thought it best,—and here he
was indeed Epimanes, “the mad”,—to compel
them to adopt one faith. The Jews however, were
not going to submit to the rash demands of a
madman. They now began a struggle which has
never been equalled in the history of the world.
In the few years that followed, many Jews sacrificed
their lives for refusing to worship heathen
idols and gods, many heroes shed their blood on
the field of battle to uphold their religion.

.pm section-break

.h3
ELEAZAR.

In Antioch, there lived a pious old man in his
ninetieth year, named Eleazar. When the overseers
.pm new-page 014
came to see that the commands of the
King were obeyed, this old man refused to eat of
the swine’s flesh which was offered him. The
King’s officer not wishing to harm so old a man,
offered to give him meat which he was allowed
to eat but which it would be announced was
swine’s flesh. In making this offer, the overseer
thought that if the other people would see the
respected Eleazar eating what they thought was
pig’s flesh, that they would readily do as he did.
The brave old man, however, refused to set such
an example to the Jews, some of whom would excuse
their weakness by his act. He was then
stripped of his clothes, beaten, and tortured. The
last words of the martyr were:
“Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is One”, and
then he died.

.pm section-break

.h3
HANNAH AND HER SEVEN SONS.

Even more pitiable is the story of Hannah
and her seven sons. A widow and her sons were
brought before Antiochus and commanded to
bow to his idols. The King first addressed the
oldest of the sons, saying: “Bow to my gods”.
“God forbid”, answered the oldest son, “that I
should bow to your idols”. “Why not?” asked
the King. “Because our commandments teach
.pm new-page 015
us, “I am the Lord your God”, and I shall worship
no other”. After being cruelly tortured in
the sight of his mother and brothers, he was
put to death.

“You have seen what was done to your brother
for disobeying me. Now, bow to my gods”,
said the King to the second son. “You can torture
me as you will”, said the youth. “I shall
not bow to your idols”. “Why not?” asked the
King. “Because we are commanded, “Thou shalt
have no other God but me”, he answered. The
King ordered that he, too, be slain.

“Obey me and your life shall be spared”, said
the King to the third son, after threatening to
tear out his tongue and cut off his hands if he
were not obeyed. “Do you seek to terrify me”,
cried the brave lad. “Our religion teaches us,
“Thou shalt worship no other Gods”, and like
my brothers I shall not forsake my religion, and
like them I shall die”. Then he was killed.

“Do not think that God has given us into your
hands to add honor to your name; it is to make
known to the world that a more cruel and wicked
man has never lived”, answered the fifth son
when commanded to bow to the King’s gods.
“Remove the insolent fellow”, cried the King,
full of wrath. And so the brave boy died.
.pm new-page 016

The sixth son was then brought before the
King. But he, too, suffered the fate of his brothers.

Finally, there remained only the mother and
her youngest son, a mere child. When Antiochus
saw him, his heart was moved, and he spoke
kindly to the child. “Come, my son,” he said to
him, “and bow to my gods”. But the boy following
the noble example set by his brothers, refused
to obey. Then the King tried to induce him to
bow by tempting offers of riches and honor. “If
you will but obey me”, the King said to him, “I
shall bring you up in riches and splendor; and,
when you are old enough, I shall make of you a
mighty prince, second only to me”. Antiochus
could promise what he would, but the child was
not to be tempted.

The mighty Antiochus was conquered, and
now his greatest desire was to induce the boy to
obey him. To accomplish this, he resorted to a
trick. “My son”, he said to him, “you see your
brothers lying dead before you; if you will refuse
to do as I ask you, you shall share their
fate. But I do not wish to harm you; you are
too young to die. I am going to cast my ring on
the ground, pick it up and your life will be
spared”. To kneel down and pick up the ring
.pm new-page 017
was not wrong, it was only a mark of respect to
the King which the Jewish Law permitted. But
the boy, young as he was, quickly saw that if he
would do so, the surrounding crowds would think
that he was bowing to the idol. For this reason,
he refused to comply with the King’s request.

The King was now growing fast impatient,
and, as a last resort, turned to the mother and told
her to induce her son to do as he requested of him.
But the mother was as faithful to her religion and
brave as her sons. She took her son to an adjoining
room, and there urged him to remain loyal
and firm, that he might soon rejoin his brothers
in heaven. Then, denouncing the cruel King in
the strongest terms, she again encouraged him to
remain faithful to the laws of their fathers. But
the boy knew himself what was right to do, and
soon told the King that he would never obey him.

The King now grew angry indeed, and ordered
that the lad be slain. But the mother, throwing
her arms around the boy, begged the King to
kill her instead of her son. “No”, answered the
King mockingly, “I cannot do so because your
own laws forbid it; for is it not said, “Whether
it be an ox or a sheep, thou shalt not kill it and
its young in one day”. As the boy was being led
away, Hannah cried out, “I have surpassed Abraham.
.pm new-page 018
He built one altar on which to sacrifice
one son, whereas I have built seven altars on
which I have sacrificed seven sons”. One by one
Hannah had seen her sons cruelly murdered; and,
no longer able to endure her misery, she jumped
down from a roof and was killed.

Eleazar and Hannah and her seven sons were
only a few of the constantly increasing number
of martyrs, who preferred to sacrifice their lives
than to disobey the laws of their fathers. Never
before had the Jews been treated with such great
cruelty, but never before did they endure their
misery with greater courage. It was in vain that
Antiochus ordered the Jews to worship heathen
idols; it was in vain that he commanded them to
adopt the religion of the Greeks. In many towns
the royal officers found no one to meet them, for
the inhabitants had escaped to the mountains,
where they could privately observe their laws. The
resistance which the Jews offered only made the
King more angry, and caused him to increase his
cruelties. Houses were plundered; synagogues
were destroyed; and thousands of Jews were put
to death, victims of the wrath of the King.

.pm section-break

.h3
MATTATHIAS AND HIS FIVE SONS.

And thus, when the Jews were on the verge of
being wiped out as a nation forever, there arose
.pm new-page 019
in their midst a family of heroes, who were destined
to free their people from their cruel oppressors,
and again establish their independence.

In Modin, a small town in Judea, there lived
an old man by the name of Mattathias. He was
the head of the priestly family of Hasmoneans
named after Hasmoneus, his great grand-father.
Mattathias was the father of five grown-up sons,
Jochanan, Simon, Judas, Eleazar, and Jonathan.
He saw how the holy city was delivered into the
hands of strangers, how the temple was robbed
of its treasures and profaned by the Syrians, how
men, women, and children were being killed for
observing the Jewish laws, and he mourned for
Israel. He was accustomed to say to his sons
that it were far better to sacrifice their lives for
their religion than to submit to such cruel treatment
at the hands of the Syrians.

When the royal officer came to Modin to enforce
the commands of the King, he requested
Mattathias, who was the oldest of the community,
to make the first sacrifice to the Greek
gods. He indignantly refused, saying that though
every one else were to yield, yet he would rather
die than forsake his religion. He then commanded
his sons to follow his example. When
a cowardly apostate stepped forward to offer
.pm new-page 020
the sacrifice, Mattathias could not restrain himself,
and killed both the Jew and the officer.

.pm section-break

.h3
THE ESCAPE TO THE MOUNTAINS.

Mattathias then cried out in a loud voice,
“Whosoever is zealous for the Law, and supporteth
the Covenant, follow me”, with his sons
and a few of his followers, Mattathias fled to
the mountains. Many Jews who favored their
plan of resistance now joined their numbers.
Whenever the opportunity offered, they would
attack the Syrian garrisons, and often were successful.
They drove out the overseers of the
King who came to enforce idol worshipping, and
destroyed every heathen altar they gained access
to. They reestablished public worship, and
did what was in their power to restore the government
of Israel. The Syrian generals, however,
soon found out how the Jews were occupying
themselves. Taking advantage of their strict
observance of the Sabbath, they attacked one
thousand Jews, who, having escaped to a cave,
allowed themselves to be slaughtered without
making any attempt to defend themselves. Mattathias,
foreseeing that if the Jews would offer
no resistance on the Sabbath, that they would
quickly be wiped out, decided that it was not only
.pm new-page 021
lawful for them to fight on that day, but that it
was their duty to do so. The decision of Mattathias
was accepted by all, and the Jews thereafter
did not hesitate to fight on the Sabbath,
when their lives were at stake.

.pm section-break

.h3
THE DEATH OF MATTATHIAS.

As Mattathias was too old to endure the hardships
of war, he found himself growing weaker
each day. Knowing that he was about to die,
he summoned his sons around him, gave them
his last blessing, and encouraged them to continue
the noble work which he had begun. He
appointed Judas, who was the bravest of his
sons, to be their leader in battle, and Simon, who
was the wisest of them, the counsellor of the
nation. Then Mattathias died, and the whole nation
mourned for him.

.pm section-break

.h3
JUDAS MACCABAEUS.

An abler leader than Judas could not have
been chosen. A giant in stature, it was said of
him that when he walked, the earth trembled
beneath him, and that his battle-cry resounded
like the roar of a lion. His bold fearlessness
made him the terror of his enemies, who shrunk
from him. But besides his great strength and
his remarkable courage, he possessed that love
.pm new-page 022
for his God, that enthusiasm for his religion
that left nothing impossible. No disadvantage
was for him too great to overcome; no army too
numerous to defeat. His personal strength and
extraordinary bravery won for him his surname
“Maccabee”, a Hebrew word meaning “Hammerer”.
There are many who say that this surname
is derived from the first letters of the
Hebrew words <lang=he>מי כמוך באלים יי</lang> “Who is like
thee, O Lord among the Gods”, which were inscribed
on Judas’s banner. At first, Judas was
the only one to be honored by the surname “Maccabee”;
but, later, the name passed to his brothers;
and, finally, to all who fought under his
standard.

.pm section-break

.h3
THE DEFEAT OF APPOLONIUS.

Judas went a step further than his father,
fortifying those cities which he took by surprise.
His small troop gradually became a small army,
numbering six thousand. Having assured himself
that he could rely on them, Judas prepared
to meet the enemy on the field. Appolonius, the
Syrian general who had recently plundered Jerusalem
and murdered its inhabitants, was soon
informed of the revolt, and raised a large army
to crush Judas. But Judas, although his army
.pm new-page 023
was only a handful compared with the large forces
of the enemy, marched against Appolonius,
and totally defeated his army and slew him. Judas
took the sword of Appolonius as a trophy,
and used it in all his latter battles.

.pm section-break

.h3
THE ROUTING OF SERON.

Seron, the Syrian lieutenant, aroused by the
news of Appolonius’s defeat, gathered a still larger
army than that which had been defeated,
and advanced against Judas. According to their
usual custom before fighting, Judas and his men
had fasted; and, weak with hunger and fatigue,
the Jews despaired of success when they saw
what a mighty host was coming to meet them.
But Judas encouraged them to fight boldly against
the oppressors of their people, saying that
strength came from heaven and not from large
numbers, and reminding them that they fought
for their lives and their laws. When he had finished
speaking he rushed upon the Syrians as
they were ascending the rocky hills at Bethoron.
Seron fell early in the battle, and his army, confused
and without a commander, was routed with
great loss of life.

.pm section-break

.h3
THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT PLACED|IN CHARGE OF LYSIAS.

When King Antiochus heard of the victories
.pm new-page 024
of Judas, he was greatly angered and raised a
large army to crush him. But along with the
news of the uprising of the Jews came the report
that his eastern provinces, Armenia and
Persia, had refused to pay their tribute. Finding
his treasury almost empty, the King was forced
to leave Antioch to collect the tribute from these
provinces by force. He gave Lysias, one of the
royal blood, one-half of all the Syrian forces;
and placed him in charge of his kingdom, with
orders to destroy the Jewish nation, and people
their land with strangers.

.pm section-break

.h3
JUDAS’S VICTORY OVER NICANOR|AND GORGIAS.

In obedience to the King’s command, Lysias
sent out, on the following year, forty thousand
footmen and five thousand horse, under Nicanor
and Gorgias. These generals set out for Judea,
and encamped on the plains of Emmaus. So
confident were the Syrians of victory, that Nicanor,
one of their generals, announced before
hand a sale of Jewish captives at ninety for a
talent—about $1000. Many Slave-Merchants
were in this way attracted to the camp, each
supplied with large amounts of gold and silver
and chains to lead off their slaves.

Judas, in the meantime, having heard that
.pm new-page 025
the Syrian armies had come to fight against him,
assembled his six thousand men at Mizpah near
Emmaus, where they fasted and prayed as in
the days of Samuel. They opened the books of
the Law, upon which the heathens had painted
images of their gods; and they were reminded of
the desolation of their holy city, the profaning
of the Temple, and all the wicked deeds of Antiochus.
Then Judas, in strict accordance with
the Law, ordered all those who had recently married,
built a house, planted a vineyard, or were
afraid, to return to their homes. His army, as
a result, was reduced from six thousand to three
thousand men. Judas then encouraged the remaining
men to fight bravely for their people,
and ordered them to prepare for battle.

In the meantime, Gorgias with five thousand
footmen and one thousand horse, had set out to
surprise the Jewish army by night. But Judas
was soon informed of this movement, and he immediately
devised a plan by which he could take
advantage of the separation of the two generals.
Silently and quickly he gathered his men, and set
out with them for Emmaus, where the remainder
of the Syrian army under Nicanor lay encamped.

It was morning before he arrived; and, encouraging
his men not to fear the large number
of the enemy by reminding them how the Jews
.pm new-page 026
were saved from the Egyptians in the Red Sea,
he rushed down upon the Syrians. The Syrian
general, thinking that Gorgias would easily crush
the small army of the Jews, had taken no steps
to guard against a surprise. The Syrians, panic-stricken
and confused, offered but feeble resistance,
and fled from all sides. Several tents had
been set on fire in the confusion, but Judas
wisely forbade the Jews to extinguish the flames
or to plunder the camps, for Gorgias had to be
met and defeated.

Gorgias and his army, meanwhile, finding the
camps of the Jews deserted, thought that they
had fled to the mountains, and went to look for
them. But what was their surprise when they
beheld the smoke rising from the tents of their
comrades! Thus deceived, the Syrians lost all
their courage; and, upon seeing Judas marching
toward them, they too turned their backs and
fled.

It was a great victory for the Maccabaean
soldiers, and they returned joyfully to the Syrian
camps, where they examined their rich plunder,
consisting not only of large quantities of food
and clothing, but also of the large sums of money
which the slave dealers had brought along with
them. As a just punishment for the slave dealers
who had come to buy, the Jews sold as many
.pm new-page 027
of them as they could find, as slaves. The next
day was the Sabbath, and it was indeed a day
of rest and rejoicing for the brave Jews.

.pm section-break

.h3
THE RETREAT OF LYSIAS.

Nicanor, who had escaped from Judea disguised
as a slave, now returned to Antioch, where
he informed Lysias of his defeat. At this news,
Lysias was aroused; and raised a still larger
army than any that had been sent before
against Judea, this time consisting of sixty
thousand footmen and five thousand horse. At
the head of this vast multitude, Lysias himself
marched against the Jews. Judas with only ten
thousand men met the Syrian army at Beth-Tsur,
where the battle took place. Although Lysias
lost but five thousand men, he was discouraged
from continuing battle, for he saw that the Jews
were determined to conquer or die. He therefore
made his retreat from Judea and returned to
Antioch.

.pm section-break

.h3
THE PURIFICATION OF THE TEMPLE.

Now that Lysias, the strongest of the King’s
generals, had been driven from Judea, the victorious
Jews could turn their attention to the holy
city, which had been defiled by the Syrians.
Judas and his men now entered Jerusalem. They
found the city in ruins, the altar profaned, the
.pm new-page 028
gates of the city burned up, and shrubs growing
in the inner courts of the Temple. At the sight
of this desolation, the Jews rent their clothes,
put ashes on their heads, and cried towards heaven.
But Judas did not allow his men to spend
too much time in useless lamentation, and set
out at once to cleanse the Temple. He then chose
priests to enter the Temple to repair and purify
it. The altar which had been defiled by the heathens,
they set up anew. The holy vessels, which
had been profaned by the Syrians, they replaced
with new ones. So zealously was the work of the restoration
carried on, that on the 25th day of the
month of Kislev, the public worship could again
be performed. With songs and thanksgiving,
the Jews dedicated the Temple anew on that happy
day.

The Talmud relates that when the purification
of the Temple had been completed, no
consecrated oil could be found with which to light
the golden candlestick. After a careful search,
however, a small bottle of oil, with the seal of a
former High Priest still on it, was found. But
it contained only a small quantity of oil, hardly
sufficient to last for one day. But lo! a miracle
happened. When the oil was lit, not only did it
last for one day but for eight days! This was
interpreted as a sure sign that God was looking
.pm new-page 029
upon the work of his people with favor, and
served to increase their happiness.

What a change the condition of the Jews had
undergone! Only three years before the Temple
had been dedicated to Jupiter Olympus, and the
flesh of swine sacrificed on the altar of incense.
And now, the most powerful of the Syrian generals
had been driven out from Judea. The bravest
of them feared the terrible Maccabee, whose
fame as a warrior was now spread far and wide.
Public worship had been restored, not to be discontinued
again until the capture of Jerusalem
by the Romans, several hundred years later. Although
the war continued for many years longer,
yet with the dedication of the Temple and the
public observance of the Jewish Laws, the actual
rule of the Syrians may be said to have come
to an end. Judea was now practically independent.

.pm section-break

.h3
THE FESTIVAL OF CHANUKA.

The restoration of the public worship in the
Temple was an event well worth remembering;
and, for this reason, Judas and the Great Council
decided that the eight days beginning with the
25th of Kislev should be celebrated henceforth,
annually, as a festival of rejoicing and thanksgiving
to commemorate the victory of the small
band of Jews over the mighty hosts of the Syrians.
.pm new-page 030
To this day, this festival which is known as
<lang=he>חנוכה</lang>  the “Feast of Dedication”, is celebrated
by the Jews each year all over the world. On the
eight days candles are lit, and special prayers
are offered to the Lord for that He saved his
people from being wiped out as a nation forever.

.il fn=i030.png w=45px ew=10%

.pb

.dv class=tnbox
.ce
.if h
<b>Transcriber’s Notes</b>
.if-
.if t
Transcriber’s Notes
.if-
.ul indent=1
.it The following issues should be noted, along with the resolution:
.ta l:4 l:52 l:11 w=90%
#7#  | was deposited by widows and orphans for safe[-]keeping. | Joined.
#7#  | deprive the righ[t]ful owners of their property, and | Added.
#17# | was not wrong, it was only a mark of r[e]spect to | Added.
#18# | And thus, when the Jews were on [the] verge of | Added.
.if h
#23# | and used it in all his latter battles. | <i>sic</i>: latter
.if-
.if t
#23# | and used it in all his latter battles. | sic: latter
.if-
#28# | [with] new ones. So zealously was the work of the restoration | Added.
#29# | The restoration of the pu[p/b]lic worship in the | Replaced.
.ta-
.ul-
.dv-